Git
1. What is Git?
 Git is a distributed version control system that allows you to track changes in code and coordinate work among developers.

2. Which main Git commands do you know?
 The most common commands are git init, git clone, git add, git commit, git push, git pull, git branch, git merge, git status, and git log.

3. What is a commit?
 A commit is saving the current state of changes to the local repository, along with a message that describes the changes made.

4. How do you revert to a previous commit?
 You can use the git revert command (which creates a new commit that undoes the changes) or git reset (which changes history locally and can be risky).

5. What is a branch in Git?
 A branch is a separate line of development that allows you to isolate new features or fixes from the main branch.

6. How do you merge branches?
 Branch merging is done with the git merge command, which integrates changes from one branch into another.

7. What is a merge conflict?
 A merge conflict occurs when two branches contain conflicting changes in the same line of a file. Resolving the conflict requires manual intervention.

8. What is the difference between Git fetch and Git pull?
 git fetch downloads the latest changes from the remote repository but does not merge them into the local branch, while git pull downloads and merges them simultaneously.

9. What is git rebase?
 Rebase is an operation that allows you to “rewrite” the commit history by re-basing the current branch on another, resulting in a more linear commit history.

10. What are the advantages and disadvantages of using rebase?

   * Advantages: A cleaner commit history, easier to track changes
   * Disadvantages: It modifies history, which can complicate collaboration if commits have already been published.
________________


Maven
   11. What is Maven?
 Maven is a project management tool that automates the build process, dependency management, and deployment of Java applications.

   12. What are the main components of Maven?
 The main components are the POM (Project Object Model), repositories, lifecycle phases, and plugins.

   13. What is a POM?
 A POM is an XML file (pom.xml) that describes the project configuration, dependencies, plugins, and other settings.

   14. How does the dependency system work in Maven?
 Maven automatically downloads the required libraries from remote repositories according to what’s specified in the POM, and also resolves their transitive dependencies.

   15. What is the Maven lifecycle?
 The lifecycle is a set of phases (e.g., validate, compile, test, package, install, deploy) that a project goes through during a build.

   16. How do you add a dependency in Maven?
 A dependency is added to the <dependencies> section of the pom.xml file, specifying the groupId, artifactId, and version.

   17. What is a plugin in Maven?
 A plugin is a set of tools that extends Maven’s functionality (for compilation, testing, creating archives, etc.).

   18. How do you run a Maven build?
 You run a Maven build via the command line using commands like mvn clean install or another appropriate phase command.

   19. What is dependency management in Maven?
 Dependency management allows you to centrally manage dependency versions by defining them in a parent POM for use in submodules.

   20. What is the Maven Repository and what types of repositories exist?
 A repository is a storage location for artifacts. Main types are local (on the developer’s machine), remote (e.g., Maven Central), and corporate.

   21. Which Maven commands are used for project testing?
 The main command for running tests is mvn test. There is also mvn verify, which includes additional checks.

   22. What Maven equivalents do you know?
 Gradle, Ant, SBT.

________________


Java Basics
      23. What is the JVM?
 The JVM (Java Virtual Machine) is a virtual machine that executes Java bytecode and provides cross-platform capabilities.

      24. What are the JRE and JDK?

         * JRE (Java Runtime Environment): Contains the JVM and libraries for running programs.
         * JDK (Java Development Kit): Includes the JRE plus development tools (compiler, debugger, etc.).
         25. What is bytecode?
 Bytecode is the intermediate code generated by the Java compiler, which is executed by the JVM.

         26. What is a class?
 A class is a blueprint that describes the properties (fields) and behavior (methods) of objects.

         27. What is an object?
 An object is an instance of a class, which has a specific state (field values) and can execute the class’s methods.

         28. What is a variable?
 A variable is a named memory location that stores a value of a certain data type.

         29. What are the main data types in Java?

            * Primitive types: byte, short, int, long, float, double, char, boolean
            * Object types (e.g., String, Integer)
            30. What are operators in Java?
 Operators are symbols or combinations of symbols that perform operations on data (arithmetic, logical, comparison, etc.).

            31. What is a method?
 A method is a block of code that performs a specific function, can take parameters, and may return a value.

            32. How do you create a method in Java?
You declare it with an access modifier, return type, method name, and parameter list, for example:

public int sum(int a, int b) {
                    return a + b;
}
               33. What is encapsulation?
 Encapsulation is the OOP principle of hiding a class’s internal implementation and exposing data through methods.

               34. What is a package in Java?
 A package is a grouping of related classes that organizes a project’s structure and helps avoid naming conflicts.

               35. How do access modifiers work?
 Access modifiers (public, protected, private, and package-private) define the visibility of classes, fields, and methods.

               36. What is a static method and field?
 A static method or field belongs to the class itself rather than an instance and is accessible without creating an object.

               37. What is a constructor?
 A constructor is a special method called when creating a new object, which initializes its fields.

               38. What is method overloading?
 Method overloading is defining multiple methods with the same name but different parameter lists.

               39. What is recursion?
 Recursion is a process where a method calls itself to solve a subproblem until a base condition is met.

               40. What are exceptions in Java?
 Exceptions are a mechanism for error handling that allows you to pass error information and handle it using try-catch blocks.

               41. What is the difference between checked and unchecked exceptions?

                  * Checked exceptions: Verified at compile time and must be handled or declared in the method signature.
                  * Unchecked exceptions (RuntimeException): Not verified at compile time.
                  42. What are generics in Java?
 Generics allow classes and methods to be parameterized by type, ensuring type safety at compile time and reducing the need for type casting.

                  43. How does autoboxing work?
 Autoboxing automatically converts primitive types to their corresponding object wrappers (e.g., int to Integer) and vice versa.

                  44. What is an enum in Java?
 An enum is a special class type that defines a set of constants, often used for representing a limited set of values.

                  45. How does the class loader system work?
 Class loaders are responsible for dynamically loading classes at runtime, keeping separate namespaces to avoid conflicts.

                  46. What is a package declaration and why is it important?
 A package declaration indicates which namespace a class belongs to, helping organize code and avoid naming conflicts.

                  47. What are annotations in Java?
 Annotations are special metadata added to classes, methods, or fields, used by the compiler or frameworks.

                  48. How do you declare and use a custom annotation?
 You declare a custom annotation with @interface, and then apply it over classes, methods, or fields.

________________


Java OOP
                     49. What is object-oriented programming (OOP)?
 OOP is a programming paradigm based on classes and objects, allowing modeling of real-world concepts.

                     50. What are the main principles of OOP?
 The main principles are encapsulation, inheritance, polymorphism, and abstraction.

                     51. What is inheritance?
 Inheritance allows one class (a subclass) to acquire the properties and methods of another (a superclass), promoting code reuse.

                     52. What is polymorphism?
 Polymorphism allows objects of different classes to respond to the same interface, enabling the same code to handle different types.

                     53. What is abstraction?
 Abstraction is the principle of highlighting the essential characteristics of an object while hiding implementation details.

                     54. What is an interface?
 An interface is a contract that declares a set of methods a class must implement, without detailing their implementation.

                     55. How do you use abstract classes?
 Abstract classes are used to define base logic inherited by subclasses; they can contain both abstract and non-abstract methods.

                     56. How is an interface different from an abstract class?
 Before Java 8, an interface contains no method implementations, while an abstract class can have both implemented and abstract methods. A class can implement multiple interfaces but can extend only one abstract class.

                     57. What is a marker interface and why is it used?
 A marker interface has no methods but marks a class as having certain properties (e.g., Serializable).

                     58. What are default methods in interfaces?
 Default methods are interface methods with an implementation, allowing interface extensions without breaking existing implementations.

                     59. How do static methods in interfaces work?
 Static methods in interfaces can be called without creating an interface instance, providing helper functions.

                     60. What is composition?
 Composition is when an object contains other objects as its fields to achieve more complex behavior.

                     61. How is composition different from inheritance?
 Inheritance extends a class’s behavior by inheriting it, while composition builds new functionality by including other objects.

                     62. What is aggregation?
 Aggregation is a relationship where one object is part of another but can exist independently.

                     63. How does method overloading work?
 Method overloading allows multiple methods with the same name but different parameter types or counts.

                     64. What is method overriding?
 Overriding is when a subclass provides its own implementation of a method that exists in the superclass.

                     65. Which access modifiers are commonly used in OOP?
 Commonly used are public, protected, private, and package-private (no explicit modifier).

                     66. What is a final class?
 A final class cannot be inherited, meaning other classes cannot extend it.

                     67. What is static?
 Static fields and methods belong to the class itself, not to its instances, enabling access without creating an object.

                     68. How do you call a superclass constructor?
 Use the super keyword in the subclass constructor to call the superclass constructor.

                     69. What is encapsulation and why is it important?
 Encapsulation hides the internal logic of a class, exposing data only through public methods, which enhances safety and controlled access to data.

                     70. What are the SOLID principles in OOP?
 SOLID is a set of design principles (Single Responsibility, Open/Closed, Liskov Substitution, Interface Segregation, Dependency Inversion) that help create clear, maintainable, and scalable code.

                     71. How do you ensure an object is immutable in Java?
 By declaring the class as final, using private final fields, and providing no setter methods.

________________


Java Collections
                        72. What is the Java Collections Framework?
 It is a set of interfaces and classes providing data structures (lists, sets, maps, etc.) and algorithms for working with them.

                        73. Which main interfaces are part of the Collections Framework?
 The main interfaces are Collection, List, Set, Queue, and Map.

                        74. What is a List?
 A List is a collection that stores elements in a defined order and allows duplicates.

                        75. What is a Set?
 A Set is a collection that stores only unique elements, with no defined order.

                        76. What is a Map?
 A Map is a collection that stores key-value pairs, where each key is unique.

                        77. What are the characteristics of ArrayList?
 ArrayList provides a dynamic array with fast random access by index, but insertion/deletion can be slow.

                        78. How does LinkedList differ from ArrayList?
 LinkedList is based on a linked list structure, allowing fast insertions/deletions, while ArrayList provides faster access by index.

                        79. What is a HashSet?
 HashSet is a Set implementation that uses a hash table to ensure element uniqueness and fast lookups.

                        80. How does TreeSet work?
 TreeSet stores elements in a sorted order using a red-black tree, enabling fast lookups and navigation.

                        81. What is a HashMap?
 HashMap is a Map implementation that stores data as key-value pairs, using hashing for fast access.

                        82. How does TreeMap differ from HashMap?
 TreeMap stores entries in sorted order by keys, while HashMap stores them in no particular order but usually offers better performance for large datasets.

                        83. What is an Iterator?
 An Iterator is an interface for traversing collection elements sequentially without exposing the underlying structure.

                        84. How do you use the foreach loop in Java?
 For example:
for (String item : list) {
            System.out.println(item);
}
                           85. What are Concurrent Collections?
 Concurrent Collections are collections designed for use in multithreaded environments, ensuring safe concurrent access.

                           86. How do equals() and hashCode() methods work in collections?

                              * equals(): Compares objects for equality
                              * hashCode(): Returns a numeric value used for distributing objects in hash-based structures
Correct implementation of both is critical for collections to function properly.
________________


Functional Interfaces
                                 87. What is a functional interface?
 A functional interface is an interface that contains only one abstract method and can be used for lambda expressions.

                                 88. What are the requirements for a functional interface?
 It must have only one abstract method; additionally, default and static methods can be present.

                                 89. Give an example of a functional interface in Java.
 An example is Runnable, which contains only one method run().

                                 90. How do you use lambda expressions with functional interfaces?
 Lambda expressions let you implement the interface’s single method with concise syntax, for example:

Runnable r = () -> System.out.println("Hello");

                                 91. What is a method reference?
 It is a shorthand for lambda expressions that refers to an existing method, for example: System.out::println.

________________


Streams
                                    92. What are Streams in Java?
 Streams are an API for working with sequences of data in a declarative way (via map, filter, reduce, etc.).

                                    93. How do you create a stream from a collection?
 Using the .stream() method, for example: list.stream().

                                    94. What are intermediate operations?
 These are operations (filter, map, sorted) that return a new stream and allow chaining of multiple transformations.

                                    95. What are terminal operations?
 Terminal operations (collect, forEach, reduce) end the stream processing and return a result.
                                    96. Give an example of using the map() operation.

List<Integer> nums = Arrays.asList(1, 2, 3);
List<Integer> squares = nums.stream()
            .map(n -> n * n)
            .collect(Collectors.toList());
                                       97. How do you use filter() in the Stream API?
 The filter() method filters stream elements by a condition, for example: stream.filter(x -> x > 10).

                                       98. What is reduce()?
 Reduce is a terminal operation that combines stream elements into one value by applying a given operation.

                                       99. What are the advantages of using the Stream API?
 It simplifies data processing, makes code more declarative, can efficiently use parallel processing, and improves readability.

                                       100. How does parallelStream() work?
 The parallelStream() method creates a parallel stream that distributes element processing across multiple threads to increase performance.

                                       101. What is lazy evaluation in Streams?
 Lazy evaluation means that stream operations do not run until a terminal operation is called.

                                       102. How do you sort data using the Stream API?
 Using the sorted() operation, for example: stream.sorted() or with a comparator: stream.sorted(Comparator.naturalOrder()).

                                       103. What is flatMap() and why is it used?
 flatMap() merges multiple streams into one, “flattening” nested data structures.

                                       104. How does collect() work in the Stream API?
 The collect() method accumulates stream results into a collection or another container, for example: Collectors.toList().



                                          105. Give an example of processing numeric streams.

IntStream.range(1, 10)
.filter(n -> n % 2 == 0)
.forEach(System.out::println);

                                          106. How do you use the peek() method in the Stream API?
 peek() allows you to perform intermediate actions (like logging) without modifying the elements, for example: stream.peek(System.out::println).

________________


Optional
                                             107. What is Optional in Java?
 Optional is a container that may or may not hold a value, helping to prevent NullPointerException.

                                             108. How do you create an Optional object?
 Using Optional.of(value), Optional.ofNullable(value), or Optional.empty().

                                             109. Which Optional methods are used to check for a value?
 Methods like isPresent(), ifPresent(), and orElse() allow you to check and handle the contained value.

                                             110. How do you use Optional.orElseThrow()?
 orElseThrow returns the value if present or throws an exception (provided by a Supplier) if not.

                                             111. What is Optional.ifPresentOrElse()?
 This method takes two parameters: a consumer for the existing value and a Runnable for actions if the value is absent.

________________


Databases
                                                112. What are the main types of databases you know?
 Relational, non-relational (NoSQL), graph, document-oriented, column-based, etc.

                                                113. What is a relational database?
 It is a database organized into tables with relationships between them, where data is stored as rows and columns.

                                                114. Which database management systems do you know?
 The most well-known are MySQL, PostgreSQL, Oracle, Microsoft SQL Server, MongoDB (as a NoSQL example).

                                                115. What is a transaction in a database?
 A transaction is a sequence of operations performed as a single unit of work, with the ability to roll back on error.

                                                116. How is data integrity ensured?
 Through keys, constraints, transactions, and ACID mechanisms (Atomicity, Consistency, Isolation, Durability).

                                                117. What is database normalization and which levels of normalization exist?
 Normalization is the process of optimizing the database structure to eliminate redundancy, commonly described by normal forms from 1NF to 5NF.

                                                118. What is denormalization and when is it used?
 Denormalization is the intentional departure from normal forms to improve read performance, though it can introduce data redundancy.

                                                119. How do indexes work in relational databases?
 Indexes speed up data retrieval by storing references to table rows, but can slow down write operations.

________________


SQL
                                                   120. What is SQL?
 SQL (Structured Query Language) is a query language for interacting with relational databases.

                                                   121. How do you write a basic SELECT query?
 SELECT * FROM table_name;

                                                   122. What is a JOIN in SQL?
 JOIN is an operation that combines rows from two or more tables based on a related column.

                                                   123. Which types of JOIN exist?
 The most common are INNER JOIN, LEFT JOIN, RIGHT JOIN, and FULL OUTER JOIN.

                                                   124. What are aggregate functions in SQL?
 Aggregate functions (SUM, AVG, COUNT, MIN, MAX) perform calculations over a set of rows and return a single value.

                                                   125. What is the difference between DELETE, DROP, and TRUNCATE?

                                                      * DELETE: Removes rows from a table based on a condition (can often be rolled back if within a transaction).
                                                      * DROP: Completely removes a database object, such as a table or database.
                                                      * TRUNCATE: Quickly removes all rows from a table and, in many systems, cannot be rolled back.
________________


Spring Boot
                                                      126. What is Spring Boot?
 Spring Boot is a framework for creating Spring applications with minimal configuration, thanks to auto-configuration and ready-made templates.

                                                      127. What are the advantages of Spring Boot?
 Rapid startup, minimal configuration, auto-configuration, embedded server, easy deployment, and extensibility.

                                                      128. How do you create a Spring Boot application?
 You can use Spring Initializr (start.spring.io) or set up the project manually by configuring the POM and configuration classes.

                                                      129. What is auto-configuration?
 Auto-configuration automatically sets up Spring components based on the dependencies and configurations present in the project.

                                                      130. How does Spring Initializr work?
 Spring Initializr is a web service that generates a Spring Boot project template with the selected dependencies and settings.

                                                      131. What is a starter dependency?
 A starter dependency is a convenient set of dependencies that simplifies adding certain technologies to a Spring Boot project.

                                                      132. How are application properties configured in Spring Boot?
 Properties are set in application.properties or application.yml files, where you define the application settings.

                                                      133. What is Spring Boot Actuator?
 Actuator provides ready-made endpoints for monitoring, managing, and analyzing the performance of Spring Boot applications.

                                                      134. How do you use profiles in Spring Boot?
 Profiles allow separate configurations for different environments (dev, prod, etc.) through the configuration file or the @Profile annotation.

________________


HTTP
                                                         135. What is HTTP?
 HTTP (Hypertext Transfer Protocol) is the protocol for data transfer between a client and a server on the web.

                                                         136. Which main HTTP methods do you know?
 The main methods are GET, POST, PUT, DELETE, PATCH, OPTIONS, and HEAD.

                                                         137. What is a RESTful API?
 A RESTful API is a web service architectural style that uses HTTP methods to work with resources identified by URLs.

                                                         138. What are HTTP status codes?
 These are numeric codes returned by the server to indicate the result of a request (e.g., 200 OK, 404 Not Found, 500 Internal Server Error).

                                                         139. How does the HTTPS protocol work?
 HTTPS is a secure version of HTTP that uses SSL/TLS to encrypt data transferred between the client and the server.

                                                         140. What are cookies and how are they used on the web?
 Cookies are small pieces of data stored by the web server on the client to identify the user, maintain session state, and store parameters.

________________


Spring Data
                                                            141. What is Spring Data?
 Spring Data is part of the Spring framework that simplifies working with databases by abstracting common CRUD operations.

                                                            142. What are the main components of Spring Data?
 The main components are repositories, data access templates (JdbcTemplate, MongoTemplate), and mechanisms for auto-generating CRUD implementations.

                                                            143. How does a repository work in Spring Data?
 A repository is an interface that extends from Spring Data. It automatically generates implementations for standard operations on an entity (save, find, delete).

                                                            144. What are CRUD operations in Spring Data?
 Create, Read, Update, and Delete — the basic operations for working with data.

                                                            145. What is Inversion of Control (IoC) and how is it implemented in Spring?
 IoC is the principle where the creation and management of objects are handled by a container. In Spring, this is implemented via Dependency Injection, automatically injecting dependencies into beans.

                                                            146. What is Dependency Injection (DI) and what types exist in Spring?
 DI is a mechanism that provides beans with their dependencies automatically. The main types are constructor injection, setter injection, and field injection.

                                                            147. What scopes of beans exist in Spring, and how do they affect object lifecycles?
 The main scopes are singleton (one instance per container), prototype (a new instance each time), request, session, and application. These determine how many instances are created and how long they live.

                                                            148. How is Spring Security integrated to provide authentication and authorization?
 Spring Security provides a comprehensive protection mechanism, including filters for authentication, URL-based access configuration, and support for various authentication methods (Basic, OAuth2, JWT, etc.).

                                                            149. More questions in English:
 https://www.tpointtech.com/corejava-interview-questions